In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Kãf-Ha-Ya-’Aĩn- Ṣãd.
˹This is˺ a reminder of your Lord’s mercy to His servant Zachariah,
when he cried out to his Lord privately,
saying, “My Lord! Surely my bones have become brittle, and grey hair has spread across my head, but I have never been disappointed in my prayer to You, my Lord!
And I am concerned about ˹the faith of˺ my relatives after me, since my wife is barren. So grant me, by Your grace, an heir,
who will inherit ˹prophethood˺ from me and the family of Jacob, and make him, O  Lord, pleasing ˹to You˺!”
˹The angels announced,˺ “O Zachariah! Indeed, We give you the good news of ˹the birth of˺ a son, whose name will be John—a name We have not given to anyone before.”
He wondered, “My Lord! How can I have a son when my wife is barren, and I have become extremely old?”
An angel replied, “So will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me, just as I created you before, when you were nothing!’”
Zachariah said, “My Lord! Grant me a sign.” He responded, “Your sign is that you will not ˹be able to˺ speak to people for three nights, despite being healthy.”
So he came out to his people from the sanctuary, signalling to them to glorify ˹Allah˺ morning and evening.
˹It was later said,˺ “O John! Hold firmly to the Scriptures.” And We granted him wisdom while ˹he was still˺ a child,
as well as purity and compassion from Us. And he was God-fearing,
and kind to his parents. He was neither arrogant nor disobedient.
Peace be upon him the day he was born, and the day of his death, and the day he will be raised back to life!
And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Mary when she withdrew from her family to a place in the east,
and screened herself off from them. Then We sent to her Our angel, ˹Gabriel,˺ appearing before her as a man, perfectly formed.
She appealed, “I truly seek refuge in the Most Compassionate from you! ˹So leave me alone˺ if you are God-fearing.”
He responded, “I am only a messenger from your Lord, ˹sent˺ to bless you with a pure son.”
She wondered, “How can I have a son when no man has ever touched me, nor am I unchaste?”
He replied, “So will it be! Your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me. And so will We make him a sign for humanity and a mercy from Us.’ It is a matter ˹already˺ decreed.”
So she conceived him and withdrew with him to a remote place.
Then the pains of labour drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She cried, “Alas! I wish I had died before this, and was a thing long forgotten!”
So a voice reassured her from below her, “Do not grieve! Your Lord has provided a stream at your feet.
And ˹if you˺ shake the trunk of this palm tree towards you, it will drop fresh, ripe dates upon you.
So eat and drink, and put your heart at ease. But if you see any of the people, say, ‘I have vowed silence to the Most Compassionate, so I am not talking to anyone today.’”
Then she returned to her people, carrying him. They said ˹in shock˺, “O Mary! You have certainly done a horrible thing!
O  sister of Aaron! Your father was not an indecent man, nor was your mother unchaste.”
So she pointed to the baby. They exclaimed, “How can we talk to someone who is an infant in the cradle?”
Jesus declared, “I am truly a servant of Allah. He has destined me to be given the Scripture and to be a prophet.
He has made me a blessing wherever I go, and bid me to establish prayer and give alms-tax as long as I live,
and to be kind to my mother. He has not made me arrogant or defiant.
Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I will be raised back to life!”
That is Jesus, son of Mary. ˹And this is˺ a word of truth, about which they dispute.
It is not for Allah to take a son! Glory be to Him. When He decrees a matter, He simply tells it, “Be!” And it is!
˹Jesus also declared,˺ “Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him ˹alone˺. This is the Straight Path.”
Yet their ˹various˺ groups have differed among themselves ˹about him˺, so woe to the disbelievers when they face a tremendous Day!
How clearly will they hear and see on the Day they will come to Us! But today the wrongdoers are clearly astray.
And warn them ˹O Prophet˺ of the Day of Regret, when all matters will be settled, while they are ˹engrossed˺ in heedlessness and disbelief.
Indeed, it is We Who will succeed the earth and whoever is on it. And to Us they will ˹all˺ be returned.
And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Abraham. He was surely a man of truth and a prophet.
˹Remember˺ when he said to his father, “O dear father! Why do you worship what can neither hear nor see, nor benefit you at all?
O  dear father! I have certainly received some knowledge which you have not received, so follow me and I will guide you to the Straight Path.
O  dear father! Do not worship Satan. Surely Satan is ever rebellious against the Most Compassionate.
O  dear father! I truly fear that you will be touched by a torment from the Most Compassionate, and become Satan’s companion ˹in Hell˺.”
He threatened, “How dare you reject my idols, O  Abraham! If you do not desist, I will certainly stone you ˹to death˺. So be gone from me for a long time!”
Abraham responded, “Peace be upon you! I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness. He has truly been Most Gracious to me.
As I distance myself from ˹all of˺ you and from whatever you invoke besides Allah, I will ˹continue to˺ call upon my Lord ˹alone˺, trusting that I will never be disappointed in invoking my Lord.”
So after he had left them and what they worshipped besides Allah, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and made each of them a prophet.
We showered them with Our mercy, and blessed them with honourable mention.
And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Moses. He was truly a chosen man, and was a messenger and a prophet.
We called him from the right side of Mount Ṭûr, and drew him near, speaking ˹with him˺ directly.
And We appointed for him—out of Our grace—his brother, Aaron, as a prophet.
And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Ishmael. He was truly a man of his word, and was a messenger and a prophet.
He used to urge his people to pray and give alms-tax. And his Lord was well pleased with him.
And mention in the Book ˹O Prophet, the story of˺ Enoch. He was surely a man of truth and a prophet.
And We elevated him to an honourable status.
Those were ˹some of˺ the prophets who Allah has blessed from among the descendants of Adam, and of those We carried with Noah ˹in the Ark˺, and of the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and of those We ˹rightly˺ guided and chose. Whenever the revelations of the Most Compassionate were recited to them, they fell down, prostrating and weeping.
But they were succeeded by generations who neglected prayer and followed their lusts and so will soon face the evil consequences.
As for those who repent, believe, and do good, it is they who will be admitted into Paradise, never being denied any reward.
˹They will be in˺ the Gardens of Eternity, promised in trust by the Most Compassionate to His servants. Surely His promise will be fulfilled.
There they will never hear any idle talk—only ˹greetings of˺ peace. And there they will have their provisions morning and evening.
That is Paradise, which We will grant to whoever is devout among Our servants.
“We only descend by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs whatever is before us, and whatever is behind us, and everything in between. And your Lord is never forgetful.
˹He is the˺ Lord of the heavens, and the earth, and everything in between. So worship Him ˹alone˺, and be steadfast in His worship. Do you know of anyone equal to Him ˹in His attributes˺?”
Yet ˹some˺ people ask ˹mockingly˺, “After I die, will I really be raised to life again?”
Do ˹such˺ people not remember that We created them before, when they were nothing?
By your Lord ˹O Prophet˺! We will surely gather them along with the devils, and then set them around Hell on their knees.
Then We will certainly begin by dragging out of every group the ones most defiant to the Most Compassionate.
And We truly know best who is most deserving of burning in it.
There is none of you who will not pass over it. ˹This is˺ a decree your Lord must fulfil.
Then We will deliver those who were devout, leaving the wrongdoers there on their knees.
When Our clear revelations are recited to them, the disbelievers ask the believers ˹mockingly˺, “Which of the two of us is better in position and superior in assembly?”
˹Imagine, O  Prophet˺ how many peoples We have destroyed before them, who were far better in luxury and splendour!
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Whoever is ˹entrenched˺ in misguidance, the Most Compassionate will allow them plenty of time, until—behold!—they face what they are threatened with: either the torment or the Hour. Only then will they realize who is worse in position and inferior in manpower.”
And Allah increases in guidance those who are ˹rightly˺ guided. And the everlasting good deeds are far better with your Lord in reward and in outcome.
Have you seen ˹O Prophet˺ the one who rejects Our revelations yet boasts, “I will definitely be granted ˹plenty of˺ wealth and children ˹if there is an afterlife˺.”?
Has he looked into the unseen or taken a pledge from the Most Compassionate?
Not at all! We certainly record whatever he claims and will increase his punishment extensively.
And We will inherit what he boasts of, and he will come before Us all by himself.
They have taken other gods, instead of Allah, seeking strength ˹and protection˺ through them.
But no! Their gods will deny their worship and turn against them.
Do you ˹O Prophet˺ not see that We have sent the devils against the disbelievers, constantly inciting them?
So do not be in haste against them, for indeed We are ˹closely˺ counting down their days.
˹Watch for˺ the Day We will gather the righteous before the Most Compassionate as an honoured delegation,
and drive the wicked to Hell like a thirsty herd.
None will have the right to intercede, except those who have taken a covenant from the Most Compassionate.
They say, “The Most Compassionate has offspring.”
You have certainly made an outrageous claim,
by which the heavens are about to burst, the earth to split apart, and the mountains to crumble to pieces
in protest of attributing children to the Most Compassionate.
It does not befit ˹the majesty of˺ the Most Compassionate to have children.
There is none in the heavens or the earth who will not return to the Most Compassionate in full submission.
Indeed, He fully knows them and has counted them precisely.
And each of them will return to Him on the Day of Judgment all alone.
As for those who believe and do good, the Most Compassionate will ˹certainly˺ bless them with ˹genuine˺ love.
Indeed, We have made this ˹Quran˺ easy in your own language ˹O Prophet˺ so with it you may give good news to the righteous and warn those who are contentious.
˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We have destroyed before them! Do you ˹still˺ see any of them, or ˹even˺ hear from them the slightest sound?
