In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
By those ˹angels˺ lined up in ranks,
and those who diligently drive ˹the clouds˺,
and those who recite the Reminder!
Surely your God is One!
˹He is˺ the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, and the Lord of all points of sunrise.
Indeed, We have adorned the lowest heaven with the stars for decoration
and ˹for˺ protection from every rebellious devil.
They cannot listen to the highest assembly ˹of angels˺ for they are pelted from every side,
˹fiercely˺ driven away. And they will suffer an everlasting torment.
But whoever manages to stealthily eavesdrop is ˹instantly˺ pursued by a piercing flare.
So ask them ˹O Prophet˺, which is harder to create: them or other marvels of Our creation? Indeed, We created them from a sticky clay.
In fact, you are astonished ˹by their denial˺, while they ridicule ˹you˺.
When they are reminded, they are never mindful.
And whenever they see a sign, they make fun of it,
saying, “This is nothing but pure magic.
When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected?
And our forefathers as well?”
Say, “Yes! And you will be fully humbled.”
It will only take one Blast, then at once they will see ˹it all˺.
They will cry, “Oh, woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!”
˹They will be told,˺ “This is the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision which you used to deny.”
˹Allah will say to the angels,˺ “Gather ˹all˺ the wrongdoers along with their peers, and whatever they used to worship
instead of Allah, then lead them ˹all˺ to the path of Hell.
And detain them, for they must be questioned.”
˹Then they will be asked,˺ “What is the matter with you that you can no longer help each other?”
In fact, on that Day they will be ˹fully˺ submissive.
They will turn on each other, throwing blame.
The misled will say, “It was you who deluded us away from what is right.”
The misleaders will reply, “No! You disbelieved on your own.
We had no authority over you. In fact, you yourselves were a transgressing people.
The decree of our Lord has come to pass against us ˹all˺: we will certainly taste ˹the punishment˺.
We caused you to deviate, for we ourselves were deviant.”
Surely on that Day they will ˹all˺ share in the punishment.
That is certainly how We deal with the wicked.
For whenever it was said to them ˹in the world˺, “There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Allah,” they acted arrogantly
and argued, “Should we really abandon our gods for a mad poet?”
In fact, he came with the truth, confirming ˹earlier˺ messengers.
You will certainly taste the painful torment,
and will only be rewarded for what you used to do.
But not the chosen servants of Allah.
They will have a known provision:
fruits ˹of every type˺. And they will be honoured
in the Gardens of Bliss,
facing each other on thrones.
A drink ˹of pure wine˺ will be passed around to them from a flowing stream:
crystal-white, delicious to drink.
It will neither harm ˹them˺, nor will they be intoxicated by it.
And with them will be maidens of modest gaze and gorgeous eyes,
as if they were pristine pearls.
Then they will turn to one another inquisitively.
One of them will say, “I once had a companion ˹in the world˺
who used to ask ˹me˺, ‘Do you actually believe ˹in resurrection˺?
When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be brought to judgment?’”
He will ˹then˺ ask, “Would you care to see ˹his fate˺?”
Then he ˹and the others˺ will look and spot him in the midst of the Hellfire.
He will ˹then˺ say, “By Allah! You nearly ruined me.
Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I ˹too˺ would have certainly been among those brought ˹to Hell˺.”
˹Then he will ask his fellow believers,˺ “Can you imagine that we will never die,
except our first death, nor be punished ˹like the others˺?”
This is truly the ultimate triumph.
For such ˹honour˺ all should strive.
Is this ˹bliss˺ a better accommodation or the tree of Zaqqûm?
We have surely made it a test for the wrongdoers.
Indeed, it is a tree that grows in the depths of Hell,
bearing fruit like devils’ heads.
The evildoers will certainly ˹be left to˺ eat from it, filling up their bellies with it.
Then on top of that they will be given a blend of boiling drink.
Then they will ultimately return to ˹their place in˺ Hell.
Indeed, they found their forefathers astray,
so they rushed in their footsteps!
And surely most of the earlier generations had strayed before them,
although We had certainly sent warners among them.
See then what was the end of those who had been warned.
But not the chosen servants of Allah.
Indeed, Noah cried out to Us, and how excellent are We in responding!
We delivered him and his family from the great distress,
and made his descendants the sole survivors.
And We blessed him ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
“Peace be upon Noah among all peoples.”
Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers.
˹For˺ he was truly one of Our faithful servants.
Then We drowned the others.
And indeed, one of those who followed his way was Abraham.
˹Remember˺ when he came to his Lord with a pure heart,
and said to his father and his people, “What are you worshipping?
Is it false gods that you desire instead of Allah?
What then do you expect from the Lord of all worlds?”
He later looked up to the stars ˹in contemplation˺,
then said, “I am really sick.”
So they turned their backs on him and went away.
Then he ˹stealthily˺ advanced towards their gods, and said ˹mockingly˺, “Will you not eat ˹your offerings˺?
What is wrong with you that you cannot speak?”
Then he swiftly turned on them, striking ˹them˺ with his right hand.
Later, his people came rushing towards him ˹furiously˺.
He argued, “How can you worship what you carve ˹with your own hands˺,
when it is Allah Who created you and whatever you do?”
They said ˹to one another˺, “Build him a furnace and cast him into the blazing fire.”
And so they sought to harm him, but We made them inferior.
He later said, “I am leaving ˹in obedience˺ to my Lord. He will guide me.
My Lord! Bless me with righteous offspring.”
So We gave him good news of a forbearing son.
Then when the boy reached the age to work with him, Abraham said, “O my dear son! I have seen in a dream that I ˹must˺ sacrifice you. So tell me what you think.” He replied, “O my dear father! Do as you are commanded. Allah willing, you will find me steadfast.”
Then when they submitted ˹to Allah’s Will˺, and Abraham laid him on his forehead ˹for sacrifice˺,
We called out to him, “O Abraham!
You have already fulfilled the vision.” Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers.
That was truly a revealing test.
And We ransomed his son with a great sacrifice,
and blessed Abraham ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
“Peace be upon Abraham.”
This is how We reward the good-doers.
He was truly one of Our faithful servants.
We ˹later˺ gave him good news of Isaac—a prophet, and one of the righteous.
We blessed him and Isaac as well. Some of their descendants did good, while others clearly wronged themselves.
And We certainly showed favour to Moses and Aaron,
and delivered them and their people from the great distress.
We helped them so it was they who prevailed.
We gave them the clear Scripture,
and guided them to the Straight Path.
And We blessed them ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
“Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.”
Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers.
They were truly ˹two˺ of Our faithful servants.
And Elias was indeed one of the messengers.
˹Remember˺ when he said to his people, “Will you not fear ˹Allah˺?
Do you call upon ˹the idol of˺ Ba’l and abandon the Best of Creators—
Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?”
But they rejected him, so they will certainly be brought ˹for punishment˺.
But not the chosen servants of Allah.
We blessed him ˹with honourable mention˺ among later generations:
“Peace be upon Elias.”
Indeed, this is how We reward the good-doers.
He was truly one of Our faithful servants.
And Lot was indeed one of the messengers.
˹Remember˺ when We delivered him and all of his family,
except an old woman, who was one of the doomed.
Then We ˹utterly˺ destroyed the rest.
You ˹Meccans˺ certainly pass by their ruins day
and night. Will you not then understand?
And Jonah was indeed one of the messengers.
˹Remember˺ when he fled to the overloaded ship.
Then ˹to save it from sinking,˺ he drew straws ˹with other passengers˺. He lost ˹and was thrown overboard˺.
Then the whale swallowed him up while he was blameworthy.
Had he not ˹constantly˺ glorified ˹Allah˺,
he would have certainly remained in its belly until the Day of Resurrection.
But We cast him onto the open ˹shore˺, ˹totally˺ worn out,
and caused a squash plant to grow over him.
We ˹later˺ sent him ˹back˺ to ˹his city of˺ one hundred thousand people or more,
who then believed ˹in him˺, so We allowed them enjoyment for a while.
Ask them ˹O Prophet˺ if your Lord has daughters, while the pagans ˹prefer to˺ have sons.
Or ˹ask them˺ if We created the angels as females right before their eyes.
Indeed, it is one of their ˹outrageous˺ fabrications to say,
“Allah has children.” They are simply liars.
Has He chosen daughters over sons?
What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
Will you not then be mindful?
Or do you have ˹any˺ compelling proof?
Then bring ˹us˺ your scripture, if what you say is true!
They have also established a ˹marital˺ relationship between Him and the jinn. Yet the jinn ˹themselves˺ know well that such people will certainly be brought ˹for punishment˺.
Glorified is Allah far above what they claim!
But not the chosen servants of Allah.
Surely you ˹pagans˺ and whatever ˹idols˺ you worship
can never lure ˹anyone˺ away from Him
except those ˹destined˺ to burn in Hell.
˹The angels respond,˺ “There is not one of us without an assigned station ˹of worship˺.
We are indeed the ones lined up in ranks ˹for Allah˺.
And we are indeed the ones ˹constantly˺ glorifying ˹His praise˺.”
They certainly used to say,
“If only we had a Reminder like ˹those of˺ earlier peoples,
we would have truly been Allah’s devoted servants.”
But ˹now˺ they reject it, so they will soon know.
Our Word has already gone forth to Our servants, the messengers,
that they would surely be helped,
and that Our forces will certainly prevail.
So turn away from the deniers for a while ˹O Prophet˺.
You will see ˹what will happen to˺ them, and they too will see!
Do they ˹really˺ wish to hasten Our punishment?
Yet when it descends upon them: how evil will that morning be for those who had been warned!
And turn away from them for a while.
You will see, and they too will see!
Glorified is your Lord—the Lord of Honour and Power—above what they claim!
Peace be upon the messengers.
And praise be to Allah—Lord of all worlds.
