In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Ḥâ-Mĩm.
By the clear Book!
Indeed, We sent it down on a blessed night, for We always warn ˹against evil˺.
On that night every matter of wisdom is ordained
by a command from Us, for We have always sent ˹messengers˺
as a mercy from your Lord. He ˹alone˺ is truly the All-Hearing, All-Knowing—
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything in between, if only you had sure faith.
There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. He ˹alone˺ gives life and causes death. ˹He is˺ your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers.
In fact, they are in doubt, amusing themselves.
Wait then ˹O Prophet˺ for the day ˹when˺ the sky will be veiled in haze, clearly visible,
overwhelming the people. ˹They will cry,˺ “This is a painful torment.
Our Lord! Remove ˹this˺ torment from us, ˹and˺ we will certainly believe.”
How can they be reminded when a messenger has already come to them, making things clear,
then they turned away from him, saying, “A madman, taught by others!”?
Indeed, We will remove ˹that˺ torment for a while, and you ˹Meccans˺ will return ˹to disbelief˺.
˹Then˺ on the Day We will deal ˹you˺ the fiercest blow, We will surely inflict punishment.
Indeed, before them We tested Pharaoh’s people: a noble messenger came to them,
˹proclaiming,˺ “Hand over the servants of Allah to me. I am truly a trustworthy messenger to you.
And do not be arrogant with Allah. I have certainly come to you with a compelling proof.
And indeed, I seek refuge with my Lord and your Lord so you do not stone me ˹to death˺.
˹But˺ if you do not believe me, then let me be.”
Ultimately, he cried out to his Lord, “These are a wicked people!”
˹Allah responded,˺ “Leave with My servants at night, for you will surely be pursued.
And leave the sea parted, for they are certainly an army bound to drown.”
˹Imagine˺ how many gardens and springs the tyrants left behind,
as well as ˹various˺ crops and splendid residences,
and luxuries which they fully enjoyed.
So it was. And We awarded it ˹all˺ to another people.
Neither heaven nor earth wept over them, nor was their fate delayed.
And We certainly delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment
of Pharaoh. He was truly a tyrant, a transgressor.
And indeed, We chose the Israelites knowingly above the others.
And We showed them signs in which there was a clear test.
Indeed, these ˹Meccans˺ say,
“There is nothing beyond our first death, and we will never be resurrected.
Bring ˹back˺ our forefathers, if what you say is true.”
Are they superior to the people of Tubba’ and those before them? We destroyed them ˹all˺, ˹for˺ they were truly wicked.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and everything in between for sport.
We only created them for a purpose, but most of these ˹pagans˺ do not know.
Surely the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision is the time appointed for all—
the Day no kith or kin will be of benefit to another whatsoever, nor will they be helped,
except those shown mercy by Allah. He is truly the Almighty, Most Merciful.
Surely ˹the fruit of˺ the tree of Zaqqûm
will be the food of the evildoer.
Like molten metal, it will boil in the bellies
like the boiling of hot water.
˹It will be said,˺ “Seize them and drag them into the depths of the Hellfire.
Then pour over their heads the torment of boiling water.”
˹The wicked will be told,˺ “Taste this. You mighty, noble one!
This is truly what you ˹all˺ used to doubt.”
Indeed, the righteous will be in a secure place,
amid Gardens and springs,
dressed in fine silk and rich brocade, facing one another.
So it will be. And We will pair them to maidens with gorgeous eyes.
There they will call for every fruit in serenity.
There they will never taste death, beyond the first death. And He will protect them from the punishment of the Hellfire—
as ˹an act of˺ grace from your Lord. That is ˹truly˺ the ultimate triumph.
Indeed, We have made this ˹Quran˺ easy in your own language ˹O Prophet˺ so perhaps they will be mindful.
Wait then! They too are certainly waiting.
