In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Those who disbelieve and hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of Allah, He will render their deeds void.
As for those who believe, do good, and have faith in what has been revealed to Muḥammad—which is the truth from their Lord—He will absolve them of their sins and improve their condition.
This is because the disbelievers follow falsehood, while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. This is how Allah shows people their true state ˹of faith˺.
So when you meet the disbelievers ˹in battle˺, strike ˹their˺ necks until you have thoroughly subdued them, then bind them firmly. Later ˹free them either as˺ an act of grace or by ransom until the war comes to an end. So will it be. Had Allah willed, He ˹Himself˺ could have inflicted punishment on them. But He does ˹this only to˺ test some of you by means of others. And those who are martyred in the cause of Allah, He will never render their deeds void.
He will guide them ˹to their reward˺, improve their condition,
and admit them into Paradise, having made it known to them.
O believers! If you stand up for Allah, He will help you and make your steps firm.
As for the disbelievers, may they be doomed and may He render their deeds void.
That is because they detest what Allah has revealed, so He has rendered their deeds void.
Have they not travelled throughout the land to see what was the end of those before them? Allah annihilated them, and a similar fate awaits the disbelievers.
This is because Allah is the Patron of the believers while the disbelievers have no patron.
Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do good into Gardens under which rivers flow. As for the disbelievers, they enjoy themselves and feed like cattle. But the Fire will be their home.
˹Imagine, O  Prophet,˺ how many societies We destroyed that were far superior in might than your society—which drove you out—and there was none to help them!
Can those ˹believers˺ who stand on clear proof from their Lord be like those whose evil deeds are made appealing to them and ˹only˺ follow their desires?
The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that in it are rivers of fresh water, rivers of milk that never changes in taste, rivers of wine delicious to drink, and rivers of pure honey. There they will ˹also˺ have all kinds of fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. ˹Can they be˺ like those who will stay in the Fire forever, left to drink boiling water that will tear apart their insides?
There are some of them who listen to you ˹O Prophet˺, but when they depart from you, they say ˹mockingly˺ to those ˹believers˺ gifted with knowledge, “What did he just say?” These are the ones whose hearts Allah has sealed and who ˹only˺ follow their desires.
As for those who are ˹rightly˺ guided, He increases them in guidance and blesses them with righteousness.
Are they only waiting for the Hour to take them by surprise? Yet ˹some of˺ its signs have already come. Once it actually befalls them, will it not be too late to be mindful?
So, know ˹well, O  Prophet,˺ that there is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Allah. And seek forgiveness for your shortcomings and for ˹the sins of˺ the believing men and women. For Allah ˹fully˺ knows your movements and places of rest ˹O people˺.
And the believers say, “If only a sûrah was revealed ˹allowing self-defence˺!” Yet when a precise sûrah is revealed, in which fighting is ˹explicitly˺ mentioned, you see those with sickness in their hearts staring at you like someone in the throes of death. It would have been better for them
to obey and speak rightly. Then when fighting was ordained, it surely would have been better for them if they were true to Allah.
Now if you ˹hypocrites˺ turn away, perhaps you would then spread corruption throughout the land and sever your ˹ties of˺ kinship!
These are the ones who Allah has condemned, deafening them and blinding their eyes.
Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Or are there locks upon their hearts?
Indeed, those who relapse ˹into disbelief˺ after ˹true˺ guidance has become clear to them, ˹it is˺ Satan ˹that˺ has tempted them, luring them with false hopes.
That is because they said ˹privately˺ to those who ˹also˺ detest what Allah has revealed, “We will obey you in some matters.” But Allah ˹fully˺ knows what they are hiding.
Then how ˹horrible˺ will it be when the angels take their souls, beating their faces and backs!
This is because they follow whatever displeases Allah and hate whatever pleases Him, so He has rendered their deeds void.
Or do those with sickness in their hearts think that Allah will not ˹be able to˺ expose their malice?
Had We willed, We could have truly shown them to you ˹O Prophet˺, and you would have certainly recognized them by their appearance. But you will surely recognize them by their tone of speech. And Allah ˹fully˺ knows your doings ˹O people˺.
We will certainly test you ˹believers˺ until We prove those of you who ˹truly˺ struggle ˹in Allah’s cause˺ and remain steadfast, and reveal how you conduct yourselves.
Indeed, those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of Allah, and defy the Messenger after ˹true˺ guidance has become clear to them; they will not harm Allah in the least, but He will render their deeds void.
O believers! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and do not let your deeds be in vain.
Surely those who disbelieve, hinder ˹others˺ from the Way of Allah, and then die as disbelievers; Allah will never forgive them.
So do not falter or cry for peace, for you will have the upper hand and Allah is with you. And He will never let your deeds go to waste.
This worldly life is no more than play and amusement. But if you are faithful and mindful ˹of Allah˺, He will grant you your ˹full˺ reward, and will not ask you ˹to donate all˺ your wealth.
If He were to do so and pressure you, you would withhold and He would bring out your resentment.
Here you are, being invited to donate ˹a little˺ in the cause of Allah. Still some of you withhold. And whoever does so, it is only to their own loss. For Allah is the Self-Sufficient, whereas you stand in need ˹of Him˺. If you ˹still˺ turn away, He will replace you with another people. And they will not be like you.
