In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
By the stars when they fade away!
Your fellow man is neither misguided nor astray.
Nor does he speak of his own whims.
It is only a revelation sent down ˹to him˺.
He has been taught by one ˹angel˺ of mighty power
and great perfection, who once rose to ˹his˺ true form
while on the highest point above the horizon,
then he approached ˹the Prophet˺, coming so close
that he was only two arms-lengths away or even less.
Then Allah revealed to His servant what He revealed ˹through Gabriel˺.
The ˹Prophet’s˺ heart did not doubt what he saw.
How can you ˹O pagans˺ then dispute with him regarding what he saw?
And he certainly saw that ˹angel descend˺ a second time
at the Lote Tree of the most extreme limit ˹in the seventh heaven˺—
near which is the Garden of ˹Eternal˺ Residence—
while the Lote Tree was overwhelmed with ˹heavenly˺ splendours!
The ˹Prophet’s˺ sight never wandered, nor did it overreach.
He certainly saw some of his Lord’s greatest signs.
Now, have you considered ˹the idols of˺ Lât and ’Uzza,
and the third one, Manât, as well?
Do you ˹prefer to˺ have sons while ˹you attribute˺ to Him daughters?
Then this is ˹truly˺ a biased distribution!
These ˹idols˺ are mere names that you and your forefathers have made up—a practice Allah has never authorized. They follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions and whatever ˹their˺ souls desire, although ˹true˺ guidance has already come to them from their Lord.
Or should every person ˹simply˺ have whatever ˹intercessors˺ they desire?
In fact, to Allah ˹alone˺ belongs this world and the next.
˹Imagine˺ how many ˹noble˺ angels are in the heavens! ˹Even˺ their intercession would be of no benefit whatsoever, until Allah gives permission to whoever He wills and ˹only for the people He˺ approves.
Indeed, those who do not believe in the Hereafter label angels as female,
although they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this. They follow nothing but ˹inherited˺ assumptions. And surely assumptions can in no way replace the truth.
So turn away ˹O Prophet˺ from whoever has shunned Our Reminder, only seeking the ˹fleeting˺ life of this world.
This is the extent of their knowledge. Surely your Lord knows best who has strayed from His Way and who is ˹rightly˺ guided.
To Allah ˹alone˺ belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth so that He may reward the evildoers according to what they did, and reward the good-doers with the finest reward—
those who avoid major sins and shameful deeds, despite ˹stumbling on˺ minor sins. Surely your Lord is infinite in forgiveness. He knew well what would become of you as He created you from the earth and while you were ˹still˺ fetuses in the wombs of your mothers. So do not ˹falsely˺ elevate yourselves. He knows best who is ˹truly˺ righteous.
Have you seen the one who turned away ˹from Islam,˺
and ˹initially˺ paid a little ˹for his salvation˺, and then stopped?
Does he have the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ˹the Hereafter˺?
Or has he not been informed of what is in the Scripture of Moses,
and ˹that of˺ Abraham, who ˹perfectly˺ fulfilled ˹his covenant˺?
˹They state˺ that no soul burdened with sin will bear the burden of another,
and that each person will only have what they endeavoured towards,
and that ˹the outcome of˺ their endeavours will be seen ˹in their record˺,
then they will be fully rewarded,
and that to your Lord ˹alone˺ is the ultimate return ˹of all things˺.
Moreover, He is the One Who brings about joy and sadness.
And He is the One Who gives life and causes death.
And He created the pairs—males and females—
from a sperm-drop when it is emitted.
And it is upon Him to bring about re-creation.
And He is the One Who enriches and impoverishes.
And He alone is the Lord of Sirius.
And He destroyed the first ˹people of˺ ’Ȃd,
and ˹then˺ Thamûd, sparing no one.
And before ˹that He destroyed˺ the people of Noah, who were truly far worse in wrongdoing and transgression.
And ˹it was˺ He ˹Who˺ turned the cities ˹of Sodom and Gomorrah˺ upside down.
How overwhelming was what covered ˹them˺!
Now, which of your Lord’s favours will you dispute?
This ˹Prophet˺ is a warner like earlier ones.
The approaching ˹Hour˺ has drawn near.
None but Allah can disclose it.
Do you find this revelation astonishing,
laughing ˹at it˺ and not weeping ˹in awe˺,
while persisting in heedlessness?
Instead, prostrate to Allah and worship ˹Him alone˺!
