In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
By those ˹winds˺ sent forth successively,
and those blowing violently,
and those scattering ˹rainclouds˺ widely!
And ˹by˺ those ˹angels˺ fully distinguishing ˹truth from falsehood˺,
and those delivering revelation,
ending excuses and giving warnings.
Surely, what you are promised will come to pass.
So when the stars are put out,
and the sky is torn apart,
and the mountains are blown away,
and the messengers’ time ˹to testify˺ comes up—
for which Day has all this been set?
For the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision!
And what will make you realize what the Day of Decision is?
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
Did We not destroy earlier disbelievers?
And We will make the later disbelievers follow them.
This is how We deal with the wicked.
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
Did We not create you from a humble fluid,
placing it in a secure place
until an appointed time?
We ˹perfectly˺ ordained ˹its development˺. How excellent are We in doing so!
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
Have We not made the earth a lodging
for the living and the dead,
and placed upon it towering, firm mountains, and given you fresh water to drink?
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
˹The disbelievers will be told,˺ “Proceed into that ˹Fire˺ which you used to deny!
Proceed into the shade ˹of smoke˺ which rises in three columns,
providing neither coolness nor shelter from the flames.
Indeed, it hurls sparks ˹as big˺ as huge castles,
and ˹as dark˺ as black camels.”
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
On that Day they will not ˹be in a position to˺ speak,
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses.
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
˹They will be told by Allah,˺ “This is the Day of ˹Final˺ Decision: We have gathered you along with earlier disbelievers ˹for punishment˺.
So if you have a scheme ˹to save yourselves˺, then use it against Me.”
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
Indeed, the righteous will be amid ˹cool˺ shade and springs
and any fruit they desire.
˹They will be told,˺ “Eat and drink happily for what you used to do.”
Surely this is how We reward the good-doers.
˹But˺ woe on that Day to the deniers!
“Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while, ˹for˺ you are truly wicked.”
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
When it is said to them, “Bow down ˹before Allah,” they do not bow.
Woe on that Day to the deniers!
So what message after this ˹Quran˺ would they believe in?
