In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Alif-Lãm-Mĩm-Ra. These are the verses of the Book. What has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺ from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not believe.
It is Allah Who has raised the heavens without pillars—as you can see—then established Himself on the Throne. He has subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. He conducts the whole affair. He makes the signs clear so that you may be certain of the meeting with your Lord.
And He is the One Who spread out the earth and placed firm mountains and rivers upon it, and created fruits of every kind in pairs.[1] He covers the day with night. Surely in this are signs for those who reflect.
And on the earth there are ˹different˺ neighbouring tracts, gardens of grapevines, ˹various˺ crops, palm trees—some stemming from the same root, others standing alone. They are all irrigated with the same water, yet We make some taste better than others. Surely in this are signs for those who understand.
˹Now,˺ if anything should amaze you ˹O Prophet˺, then it is their question
They ask you ˹O Prophet˺ to hasten the torment rather than grace, though there have ˹already˺ been ˹many˺ torments before them. Surely your Lord is full of forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoing, and your Lord is truly severe in punishment.
The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his Lord.” You ˹O Prophet˺ are only a warner. And every people had a guide.
Allah knows what every female bears and what increases and decreases in the wombs.[1] And with Him everything is determined with precision.
˹He is the˺ Knower of the seen and the unseen—the All-Great, Most Exalted.
It is the same ˹to Him˺ whether any of you speaks secretly or openly, whether one hides in the darkness of night or goes about in broad daylight.
For each one there are successive angels before and behind, protecting them by Allah’s command. Indeed, Allah would never change a people’s state ˹of favour˺ until they change their own state ˹of faith˺. And if it is Allah’s Will to torment a people, it can never be averted, nor can they find a protector other than Him.
He is the One Who shows you lightning, inspiring ˹you with˺ hope and fear,[1] and produces heavy clouds.
The thunder glorifies His praises, as do the angels in awe of Him. He sends thunderbolts, striking with them whoever He wills. Yet they dispute about Allah. And He is tremendous in might.
Calling upon Him ˹alone˺ is the truth. But those ˹idols˺ the pagans invoke besides Him ˹can˺ never respond to them in any way. ˹It is˺ just like someone who stretches out their hands to water, ˹asking it˺ to reach their mouths, but it can never do so. The calls of the disbelievers are only in vain.
To Allah ˹alone˺ bow down ˹in submission˺[1] all those in the heavens and the earth—willingly or unwillingly—as do their shadows, morning and evening.
Ask ˹them, O  Prophet˺, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say, “Allah!” Ask ˹them˺, “Why ˹then˺ have you taken besides Him lords who cannot even benefit or protect themselves?” Say, “Can the blind and the sighted be equal? Or can darkness and light be equal?”[1] Or have they associated with Allah partners who ˹supposedly˺ produced a creation like His, leaving them confused between the two creations? Say, “Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Supreme.”
He sends down rain from the sky, causing the valleys to flow, each according to its capacity. The currents then carry along rising foam, similar to the slag produced from metal that people melt in the fire for ornaments or tools. This is how Allah compares truth to falsehood. The ˹worthless˺ residue is then cast away, but what benefits people remains on the earth. This is how Allah sets forth parables.
Those who respond to ˹the call of˺ their Lord will have the finest reward. As for those who do not respond to Him, even if they were to possess everything in the world twice over, they would certainly offer it to ransom themselves. They will face strict judgment, and Hell will be their home. What an evil place to rest!
Can the one who knows that your Lord’s revelation to you ˹O Prophet˺ is the truth be like the one who is blind? None will be mindful ˹of this˺ except people of reason.
˹They are˺ those who honour Allah’s covenant, never breaking the pledge;
and those who maintain whatever ˹ties˺ Allah has ordered to be maintained, stand in awe of their Lord, and fear strict judgment.
And ˹they are˺ those who endure patiently, seeking their Lord’s pleasure,[1] establish prayer, donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and openly—and respond to evil with good. It is they who will have the ultimate abode
the Gardens of Eternity, which they will enter along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and descendants. And the angels will enter upon them from every gate, ˹saying,˺
“Peace be upon you for your perseverance. How excellent is the ultimate abode!”
And those who violate Allah’s covenant after it has been affirmed, break whatever ˹ties˺ Allah has ordered to be maintained, and spread corruption in the land—it is they who will be condemned and will have the worst abode.[1]
Allah gives abundant or limited provisions to whoever He wills. And the disbelievers become prideful of ˹the pleasures of˺ this worldly life. But the life of this world, compared to the Hereafter, is nothing but a fleeting enjoyment.
The disbelievers say, “If only a sign could be sent down to him from his Lord.”[1] Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Indeed, Allah leaves to stray whoever He wills, and guides to Himself whoever turns to Him—
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of Allah. Surely in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find comfort.
Those who believe and do good, for them will be bliss and an honourable destination.”
And so We have sent you ˹O Prophet˺ to a community, like ˹We did with˺ earlier communities, so that you may recite to them what We have revealed to you. Yet they deny the Most Compassionate.[1] Say, “He is my Lord! There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him. In Him I put my trust, and to Him I turn ˹in repentance˺.”
If there were a recitation that could cause mountains to move, or the earth to split, or the dead to speak, ˹it would have been this Quran˺. But all matters are by Allah’s Will. Have the believers not yet realized that had Allah willed, He could have guided all of humanity? And disasters will continue to afflict the disbelievers or strike close to their homes for their misdeeds, until Allah’s promise comes to pass. Surely Allah never fails in His promise.
Other messengers had already been ridiculed before you, but I delayed the disbelievers ˹for a while˺ then seized them. And how ˹horrible˺ was My punishment!
Is ˹there any equal to˺ the Vigilant One Who knows what every soul commits? Yet the pagans have associated others with Allah ˹in worship˺. Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Name them! Or do you ˹mean to˺ inform Him of something He does not know on the earth? Or are these ˹gods˺ just empty words?” In fact, the disbelievers’ falsehood has been made so appealing to them that they have been turned away from the Path. And whoever Allah leaves to stray will be left with no guide.
For them is punishment in this worldly life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is truly far worse. And none can shield them from Allah.
The description of the Paradise promised to the righteous is that under it rivers flow; eternal is its fruit as well as its shade. That is the ˹ultimate˺ outcome for the righteous. But the outcome for the disbelievers is the Fire!
˹The believers among˺ those who were given the Scripture rejoice at what has been revealed to you ˹O Prophet˺, while some ˹disbelieving˺ factions deny a portion of it. Say, “I have only been commanded to worship Allah, associating none with Him ˹in worship˺. To Him I invite ˹all˺, and to Him is my return.”
And so We have revealed it as an authority in Arabic. And if you were to follow their desires after ˹all˺ the knowledge that has come to you, there would be none to protect or shield you from Allah.
We have certainly sent messengers before you ˹O Prophet˺ and blessed them with wives and offspring. It was not for any messenger to bring a sign without Allah’s permission. Every destined matter has a ˹set˺ time.
Allah eliminates and confirms what He wills, and with Him is the Master Record.[1]
Whether We show you ˹O Prophet˺ some of what We threaten them with, or cause you to die ˹before that˺, your duty is only to deliver ˹the message˺. Judgment is for Us.
Do they not see that We gradually reduce their land from its borders? Allah decides—none can reverse His decision. And He is swift in reckoning.
Those ˹disbelievers˺ before them ˹secretly˺ planned, but Allah has the ultimate plan. He knows what every soul commits. And the disbelievers will soon know who will have the ultimate outcome.
The disbelievers say, “You ˹Muḥammad˺ are no messenger.” Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Allah is sufficient as a Witness between me and you, as is whoever has knowledge of the Scripture.”