In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Qãf. By the glorious Quran!
˹All will be resurrected,˺ yet the deniers are astonished that a warner has come to them from among themselves ˹warning of resurrection˺. So the disbelievers say, “This is an astonishing thing!
˹Will we be returned to life,˺ when we are dead and reduced to dust? Such a return is impossible.”
We certainly know what the earth consumes of them ˹after their death˺, and with us is a well-preserved Record.[1]
In fact, they reject the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a confused state.[1]
Have they not then looked at the sky above them
As for the earth, We spread it out and placed upon it firm mountains, and produced in it every type of pleasant plant—
˹all as˺ an insight and a reminder to every servant who turns ˹to Allah˺.
And We send down blessed rain from the sky, bringing forth gardens and grains for harvest,
and towering palm trees ˹loaded˺ with clustered fruit,
˹as˺ a provision for ˹Our˺ servants. And with this ˹rain˺ We revive a lifeless land. Similar is the emergence ˹from the graves˺.
Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth,˺ as did the people of the Water-pit,[1] Thamûd,
’Ȃd, Pharaoh, the kinfolk of Lot,
the residents of the Forest,[1] and the people of Tubba’.[2] Each rejected ˹their˺ messenger, so My warning was fulfilled.
Were We incapable of creating ˹them˺ the first time? In fact, they are in doubt about ˹their˺ re-creation.
Indeed, ˹it is˺ We ˹Who˺ created humankind and ˹fully˺ know what their souls whisper to them, and We are closer to them than ˹their˺ jugular vein.
As the two recording-angels—˹one˺ sitting to the right, and ˹the other to˺ the left—note ˹everything˺,
not a word does a person utter without having a ˹vigilant˺ observer ready ˹to write it down˺.[1]
˹Ultimately,˺ with the throes of death will come the truth.[1] This is what you were trying to escape!
And the Trumpet will be blown.[1] This is the Day ˹you were˺ warned of.
Each soul will come forth with an angel to drive it and another to testify.
˹It will be said to the denier,˺ “You were totally heedless of this. Now We have lifted this veil of yours, so Today your sight is sharp!”
And one’s accompanying-angel will say, “Here is the record ready with me.”
˹It will be said to both angels,˺ “Throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever,
withholder of good, transgressor, and doubter,
who set up another god with Allah. So cast them into the severe punishment.”
One’s ˹devilish˺ associate will say, “Our Lord! I did not make them transgress. Rather, they were far astray ˹on their own˺.”
Allah will respond, “Do not dispute in My presence, since I had already given you a warning.
My Word cannot be changed,[1] nor am I unjust to ˹My˺ creation.”
˹Beware of˺ the Day We will ask Hell, “Are you full ˹yet˺?” And it will respond, “Are there any more?”
And Paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far off.
˹And it will be said to them,˺ “This is what you were promised, for whoever ˹constantly˺ turned ˹to Allah˺ and kept up ˹His commandments˺—
who were in awe of the Most Compassionate without seeing ˹Him˺,[1] and have come with a heart turning ˹only to Him˺.
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of eternal life!”
There they will have whatever they desire, and with Us is ˹even˺ more.[1]
˹Imagine˺ how many peoples We destroyed before them, who were far mightier than them. Then ˹when the torment came,˺ they ˹desperately˺ sought refuge in the land. ˹But˺ was there any escape?
Surely in this is a reminder for whoever has a ˹mindful˺ heart and lends an attentive ear.
Indeed, We created the heavens and the earth and everything in between in six Days,[1] and We were not ˹even˺ touched with fatigue.[2]
So be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say. And glorify the praises of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset.
And glorify Him during part of the night[1] and after the prayers.
And listen! On the Day the caller will call out from a near place,
the Day all will hear the ˹mighty˺ Blast in ˹all˺ truth,[1] that will be the Day of emergence ˹from the graves˺.
It is certainly We Who give life and cause death. And to Us is the final return.
˹Beware of˺ the Day the earth will split open, letting them rush forth. That will be an easy gathering for Us.
We know best what they say. And you ˹O Prophet˺ are not ˹there˺ to compel them ˹to believe˺. So remind with the Quran ˹only˺ those who fear My warning.