In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
The Hour has drawn near and the moon was split ˹in two˺.[1]
Yet, whenever they see a sign, they turn away,[1] saying, “Same old magic!”
They rejected ˹the truth˺ and followed their own desires—and every matter will be settled—
even though the stories ˹of destroyed nations˺ that have already come to them are a sufficient deterrent.
˹This Quran is˺ profound ˹in˺ wisdom, but warnings are of no benefit ˹to them˺.
So turn away from them ˹O Prophet˺. ˹And wait for˺ the Day ˹when˺ the caller[1] will summon ˹them˺ for something horrifying.[2]
With eyes downcast, they will come forth from the graves as if they were swarming locusts,
rushing towards the caller. The disbelievers will cry, “This is a difficult Day!”
Before them, the people of Noah denied ˹the truth˺ and rejected Our servant, calling ˹him˺ insane. And he was intimidated.
So he cried out to his Lord, “I am helpless, so help ˹me˺!”
So We opened the gates of the sky with pouring rain,
and caused the earth to burst with springs, so the waters met for a fate already set.
We carried him on that ˹Ark made˺ of planks and nails,
sailing under Our ˹watchful˺ Eyes—a ˹fair˺ punishment on behalf of the one ˹they˺ denied.
We certainly left this[1] as a sign. So is there anyone who will be mindful?
Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings!
And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful?
’Ȃd ˹also˺ rejected ˹the truth˺. Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings!
Indeed, We sent against them a furious wind,[1] on a day of unrelenting misery,
that snatched people up, leaving them like trunks of uprooted palm trees.
Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings!
And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful?
Thamûd rejected the warnings ˹as well˺,
arguing, “How can we follow one ˹average˺ human being from among us? We would then truly be misguided and insane.
Has the revelation been sent down ˹only˺ to him out of ˹all of˺ us? In fact, he is a boastful liar.”
˹It was revealed to Ṣâliḥ,˺ “They will soon know who the boastful liar is.
We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. So watch them ˹closely˺, and have patience.
And tell them that the ˹drinking˺ water must be divided between them ˹and her˺, each taking a turn to drink ˹every other day˺.”
But they roused a companion of theirs, so he dared to kill ˹her˺.
Then how ˹dreadful˺ were My punishment and warnings!
Indeed, We sent against them ˹only˺ one ˹mighty˺ blast, leaving them like the twigs of fence-builders.
And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful?
The people of Lot ˹also˺ rejected the warnings.
We unleashed upon them a storm of stones. As for ˹the believers of˺ Lot’s family, We delivered them before dawn
as a blessing from Us. This is how We reward whoever gives thanks.
He had already warned them of Our ˹crushing˺ blow but they disputed the warnings.
And they even demanded his angel-guests from him,[1] so We blinded their eyes. ˹And they were told,˺ “Taste then My punishment and warnings!”
And indeed, by the early morning they were overwhelmed by an unrelenting torment.
˹Again they were told,˺ “Taste now My punishment and warnings!”
And We have certainly made the Quran easy to remember. So is there anyone who will be mindful?
And indeed, the warnings ˹also˺ came to the people of Pharaoh.
˹But˺ they rejected all of Our signs, so We seized them with the ˹crushing˺ grip of the Almighty, Most Powerful.
Now, are you ˹Meccan˺ disbelievers superior to those ˹destroyed peoples˺? Or have you ˹been granted˺ immunity ˹from punishment˺ in divine Books?
Or do they say, “We are all ˹a˺ united ˹front˺, bound to prevail.”?
˹Soon˺ their united front will be defeated and ˹forced to˺ flee.[1]
Better yet, the Hour is their appointed time—and the Hour will be most catastrophic and most bitter.
Indeed, the wicked are ˹entrenched˺ in misguidance, and ˹are bound for˺ blazes.
On the Day they will be dragged into the Fire on their faces, ˹they will be told,˺ “Taste the touch of Hell!”[1]
Indeed, We have created everything, perfectly preordained.
Our command[1] is but a single word,[2] done in the blink of an eye.
We have already destroyed the likes of you. So will any ˹of you˺ be mindful?
Everything they have done is ˹listed˺ in ˹their˺ records.
Every matter, small and large, is written ˹precisely˺.
Indeed, the righteous will be amid Gardens and rivers,[1]
at the Seat of Honour in the presence of the Most Powerful Sovereign.