In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Ḥâ-Mĩm.
The revelation of this Book is from Allah—the Almighty, All-Wise.
Surely in ˹the creation of˺ the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers.
And in your own creation, and whatever living beings He dispersed, are signs for people of sure faith.
And ˹in˺ the alternation of the day and the night, the provision sent down from the skies by Allah—reviving the earth after its death—and the shifting of the winds, are signs for people of understanding.
These are Allah’s revelations which We recite to you ˹O Prophet˺ in truth. So what message will they believe in after ˹denying˺ Allah and His revelations?
Woe to every sinful liar.
They hear Allah’s revelations recited to them, then persist ˹in denial˺ arrogantly as if they did not hear them. So give them good news of a painful punishment.
And whenever they learn anything of Our revelations, they make a mockery of it. It is they who will suffer a humiliating punishment.
Awaiting them is Hell. Their ˹worldly˺ gains will not be of any benefit to them whatsoever, nor will those protectors they have taken besides Allah. And they will suffer a tremendous punishment.
This ˹Quran˺ is ˹true˺ guidance. And those who deny their Lord’s revelations will suffer the ˹worst˺ torment of agonizing pain.
Allah is the One Who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by His command, and that you may seek His bounty, and that perhaps you will be grateful.
He ˹also˺ subjected for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth—all by His grace. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
˹O Prophet!˺ Tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear Allah’s days ˹of torment˺, so that He will reward each group for what they used to commit.
Whoever does good, it is to their own benefit. And whoever does evil, it is to their own loss. Then to your Lord you will ˹all˺ be returned.
Indeed, We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood; granted them good, lawful provisions; and favoured them above the others.
We ˹also˺ gave them clear commandments regarding ˹their˺ faith. But it was not until knowledge came to them that they differed out of mutual envy. Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment regarding their differences.
Now We have set you ˹O Prophet˺ on the ˹clear˺ Way of faith. So follow it, and do not follow the desires of those who do not know ˹the truth˺.
They certainly can be of no benefit to you against Allah whatsoever. Surely the wrongdoers are patrons of each other, whereas Allah is the Patron of the righteous.
This ˹Quran˺ is an insight for humanity—a guide and mercy for people of sure faith.
Or do those who commit evil deeds ˹simply˺ think that We will make them equal—in their life and after their death—to those who believe and do good? How wrong is their judgment!
For Allah created the heavens and the earth for a purpose, so that every soul may be paid back for what it has committed. And none will be wronged.
Have you seen ˹O Prophet˺ those who have taken their own desires as their god? ˹And so˺ Allah left them to stray knowingly, sealed their hearing and hearts, and placed a cover on their sight. Who then can guide them after Allah? Will you ˹all˺ not then be mindful?
And they argue, “There is nothing beyond our worldly life. We die; others are born. And nothing destroys us but ˹the passage of˺ time.” Yet they have no knowledge ˹in support˺ of this ˹claim˺. They only speculate.
And whenever Our clear revelations are recited to them, their only argument is to say
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “˹It is˺ Allah ˹Who˺ gives you life, then causes you to die, then will gather you ˹all˺ on the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt. But most people do not know.”
To Allah ˹alone˺ belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the Day the Hour will be established, the people of falsehood will then be in ˹total˺ loss.
And you will see every faith-community on its knees. Every community will be summoned to its record ˹of deeds˺. ˹They all will be told,˺ “This Day you will be rewarded for what you used to do.
This record of Ours speaks the truth about you. Indeed, We always had your deeds recorded ˹by the angels˺.”
As for those who believed and did good, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. That is ˹truly˺ the absolute triumph.
And as for those who disbelieved, ˹they will be told,˺ “Were My revelations not recited to you, yet you acted arrogantly and were a wicked people?
And whenever it was said ˹to you˺, ‘Surely Allah’s promise ˹of judgment˺ is true and there is no doubt about the Hour,’ you said ˹mockingly˺, ‘We do not know what the Hour is! We think it is no more than speculation, and we are not convinced ˹that it will ever come˺.’”
And the evil ˹consequences˺ of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be overwhelmed by what they used to ridicule.
It will be said, “This Day We will neglect you as you neglected the meeting of this Day of yours! Your home will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.
This is because you made a mockery of Allah’s revelations, and were deluded by ˹your˺ worldly life.” So ˹from˺ that Day ˹on˺ they will not be taken out of the Fire, nor will they be allowed to appease ˹their Lord˺.
So all praise is for Allah—Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, Lord of all worlds.
To Him belongs ˹all˺ Majesty in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Almighty, All-Wise.