In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
When the Inevitable Event takes place,
then no one can deny it has come.
It will debase ˹some˺ and elevate ˹others˺.
When the earth will be violently shaken,
and the mountains will be crushed to pieces,
becoming scattered ˹particles of˺ dust,
you will ˹all˺ be ˹divided into˺ three groups
the people of the right, how ˹blessed˺ will they be;
the people of the left, how ˹miserable˺ will they be;
and the foremost ˹in faith˺ will be the foremost ˹in Paradise˺.
They are the ones nearest ˹to Allah˺,
in the Gardens of Bliss.
˹They will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
and a few from later generations.
˹All will be˺ on jewelled thrones,
reclining face to face.
They will be waited on by eternal youths
with cups, pitchers, and a drink ˹of pure wine˺ from a flowing stream,
that will cause them neither headache nor intoxication.
˹They will also be served˺ any fruit they choose
and meat from any bird they desire.
And ˹they will have˺ maidens with gorgeous eyes,
like pristine pearls,
˹all˺ as a reward for what they used to do.
There they will never hear any idle or sinful talk—
only good and virtuous speech.
And the people of the right—how ˹blessed˺ will they be!
˹They will be˺ amid thornless lote trees,
clusters of bananas,
extended shade,
flowing water,
abundant fruit—
never out of season nor forbidden—
and elevated furnishings.
Indeed, We will have perfectly created their mates,
making them virgins,
loving and of equal age,
for the people of the right,
˹who will be˺ a multitude from earlier generations
and a multitude from later generations.
And the people of the left—how ˹miserable˺ will they be!
˹They will be˺ in scorching heat and boiling water,
in the shade of black smoke,
neither cool nor refreshing.
Indeed, before this ˹torment˺ they were spoiled by luxury,
and persisted in the worst of sin.
They used to ask ˹mockingly˺, “When we are dead and reduced to dust and bones, will we really be resurrected?
And our forefathers as well?”
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Most certainly, earlier and later generations
will surely be gathered ˹together˺ for the appointed Day.
Then you, O  misguided deniers,
will certainly eat from ˹the fruit of˺ the trees of Zaqqûm,
filling up ˹your˺ bellies with it.
Then on top of that you will drink boiling water—
and you will drink ˹it˺ like thirsty camels do.”
This will be their accommodation on the Day of Judgment.
It is We Who created you. Will you not then believe ˹in resurrection˺?
Have you considered what you ejaculate?
Is it you who create ˹a child out of˺ it, or is it We Who do so?
We have ordained death for ˹all of˺ you, and We cannot be prevented
from transforming and recreating you in forms unknown to you.
You already know how you were first created. Will you not then be mindful?
Have you considered what you sow?
Is it you who cause it to grow, or is it We Who do so?
If We willed, We could simply reduce this ˹harvest˺ to chaff, leaving you to lament,
“We have truly suffered a ˹great˺ loss.
In fact, we have been deprived ˹of our livelihood˺.”
Have you considered the water you drink?
Is it you who bring it down from the clouds, or is it We Who do so?
If We willed, We could make it salty. Will you not then give thanks?
Have you considered the fire you kindle?
Is it you who produce its trees, or is it We Who do so?
We have made it ˹as˺ a reminder ˹of the Hellfire˺ and a provision for the travellers.
So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest.
So I do swear by the positions of the stars—
and this, if only you knew, is indeed a great oath—
that this is truly a noble Quran,
in a well-preserved Record,
touched by none except the purified ˹angels˺.
˹It is˺ a revelation from the Lord of all worlds.
How can you then take this message lightly,
and repay ˹Allah for˺ your provisions with denial?
Why then ˹are you helpless˺ when the soul ˹of a dying person˺ reaches ˹their˺ throat,
while you are looking on?
And We are nearer to such a person than you, but you cannot see.
Now, if you are not subject to Our Will ˹as you claim˺,
bring that soul back, if what you say is true.
So, if the deceased is one of those brought near ˹to Us˺,
then ˹such a person will have˺ serenity, fragrance, and a Garden of Bliss.
And if the deceased is one of the people of the right,
then ˹they will be told,˺ “Greetings to you from the people of the right.”
But if such person is one of the misguided deniers,
then their accommodation will be boiling water ˹to drink˺
and burning in Hellfire.
Indeed, this is the absolute truth.
So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Greatest.