In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Blessed is the One in Whose Hands rests all authority. And He is Most Capable of everything.
˹He is the One˺ Who created death and life in order to test which of you is best in deeds. And He is the Almighty, All-Forgiving.
˹He is the One˺ Who created seven heavens, one above the other. You will never see any imperfection in the creation of the Most Compassionate. So look again
Then look again and again—your sight will return frustrated and weary.
And indeed, We adorned the lowest heaven with ˹stars like˺ lamps, and made them ˹as missiles˺ for stoning ˹eavesdropping˺ devils, for whom We have also prepared the torment of the Blaze.
Those who disbelieve in their Lord will suffer the punishment of Hell. What an evil destination!
When they are tossed into it, they will hear its roaring as it boils over,
almost bursting in fury. Every time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did a warner not come to you?”
They will reply, “Yes, a warner did come to us, but we denied and said, ‘Allah has revealed nothing. You are extremely astray.’”
And they will lament, “If only we had listened and reasoned, we would not be among the residents of the Blaze!”
And so they will confess their sins. So away with the residents of the Blaze!
Indeed, those in awe of their Lord without seeing Him will have forgiveness and a mighty reward.
Whether you speak secretly or openly—He surely knows best what is ˹hidden˺ in the heart.
How could He not know His Own creation? For He ˹alone˺ is the Most Subtle, All-Aware.
He is the One Who smoothed out the earth for you, so move about in its regions and eat from His provisions. And to Him is the resurrection ˹of all˺.
Do you feel secure that the One Who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you up as it quakes violently?
Or do you feel secure that the One Who is in heaven will not unleash upon you a storm of stones. Only then would you know how ˹serious˺ My warning was!
And certainly those before them denied ˹as well˺, then how severe was My response!
Have they not seen the birds above them, spreading and folding their wings? None holds them up except the Most Compassionate. Indeed, He is All-Seeing of everything.
Also, which ˹powerless˺ force will come to your help instead of the Most Compassionate? Indeed, the disbelievers are only ˹lost˺ in delusion.
Or who is it that will provide for you if He withholds His provision? In fact, they persist in arrogance and aversion ˹to the truth˺.
Who is ˹rightly˺ guided
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “He is the One Who brought you into being and gave you hearing, sight, and intellect. ˹Yet˺ you hardly give any thanks.”
˹Also˺ say, “He is the One Who has dispersed you ˹all˺ over the earth, and to Him you will ˹all˺ be gathered.”
˹Still˺ they ask ˹the believers˺, “When will this threat come to pass, if what you say is true?”
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “That knowledge is with Allah alone, and I am only sent with a clear warning.”
Then when they see the torment drawing near, the faces of the disbelievers will become gloomy, and it will be said ˹to them˺, “This is what you claimed would never come.”
Say, ˹O Prophet,˺ “Consider this
Say, “He is the Most Compassionate—in Him ˹alone˺ we believe, and in Him ˹alone˺ we trust. You will soon know who is clearly astray.”
Say, “Consider this