In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
O you wrapped ˹in your clothes˺!
Stand all night ˹in prayer˺ except a little—
˹pray˺ half the night, or a little less,
or a little more—and recite the Quran ˹properly˺ in a measured way.
˹For˺ We will soon send upon you a weighty revelation.
Indeed, worship in the night is more impactful and suitable for recitation.
For during the day you are over-occupied ˹with worldly duties˺.
˹Always˺ remember the Name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly.
˹He is the˺ Lord of the east and the west. There is no god ˹worthy of worship˺ except Him, so take Him ˹alone˺ as a Trustee of Affairs.
Be patient ˹O Prophet˺ with what they say, and depart from them courteously.
And leave to Me the deniers—the people of luxury—and bear with them for a little while.
˹For˺ We certainly have shackles, a ˹raging˺ Fire,
choking food, and a painful punishment ˹in store for them˺
on the Day the earth and mountains will shake ˹violently˺, and mountains will be ˹reduced to˺ dunes of shifting sand.
Indeed, We have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you, just as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh.
But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We seized him with a stern grip.
If you ˹pagans˺ persist in disbelief, then how will you guard yourselves against ˹the horrors of˺ a Day which will turn children’s hair grey?
It will ˹even˺ cause the sky to split apart. His promise ˹of judgment˺ must be fulfilled.
Surely this is a reminder. So let whoever wills take the ˹Right˺ Way to their Lord.
Surely your Lord knows that you ˹O Prophet˺ stand ˹in prayer˺ for nearly two-thirds of the night, or ˹sometimes˺ half of it, or a third, as do some of those with you. Allah ˹alone˺ keeps a ˹precise˺ measure of the day and night. He knows that you ˹believers˺ are unable to endure this, and has turned to you in mercy. So recite ˹in prayer˺ whatever you can from the Quran. He knows that some of you will be sick, some will be travelling throughout the land seeking Allah’s bounty, and some fighting in the cause of Allah. So recite whatever you can from it. And ˹continue to˺ perform ˹regular˺ prayers, pay alms-tax, and lend to Allah a good loan. Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will find it with Allah far better and more rewarding. And seek Allah’s forgiveness. Surely Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.