In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
I do swear by the Day of Judgment!
And I do swear by the self-reproaching soul!
Do people think We cannot reassemble their bones?
Yes ˹indeed˺! We are ˹most˺ capable of restoring ˹even˺ their very fingertips.
Still people want to deny what is yet to come,
asking ˹mockingly˺, “When is this Day of Judgment?”
But when the sight is stunned,
and the moon is dimmed,
and the sun and the moon are brought together,
on that Day one will cry, “Where is the escape?”
But no! There will be no refuge.
On that Day all will end up before your Lord.
All will then be informed of what they have sent forth and left behind.
In fact, people will testify against their own souls,
despite the excuses they come up with.
Do not rush your tongue trying to memorize ˹a revelation of˺ the Quran.
It is certainly upon Us to ˹make you˺ memorize and recite it.
So once We have recited a revelation ˹through Gabriel˺, follow its recitation ˹closely˺.
Then it is surely upon Us to make it clear ˹to you˺.
But no! In fact, you love this fleeting world,
and neglect the Hereafter.
On that Day ˹some˺ faces will be bright,
looking at their Lord.
And ˹other˺ faces will be gloomy,
anticipating something devastating to befall them.
But no! ˹Beware of the day˺ when the soul reaches the collar bone ˹as it leaves˺,
and it will be said, “Is there any healer ˹who can save this life˺?”
And the dying person realizes it is ˹their˺ time to depart,
and ˹then˺ their feet are tied together ˹in a shroud˺.
On that day they will be driven to your Lord ˹alone˺.
This denier neither believed nor prayed,
but persisted in denial and turned away,
then went to their own people, walking boastfully.
Woe to you, and more woe!
Again, woe to you, and even more woe!
Do people think they will be left without purpose?
Were they not ˹once˺ a sperm-drop emitted?
Then they became a clinging clot ˹of blood˺, then He developed and perfected their form,
producing from it both sexes, male and female.
Is such ˹a Creator˺ unable to bring the dead back to life?