In the Name of Allah—the Most Compassionate, Most Merciful.
Woe to the defrauders!
Those who take full measure ˹when they buy˺ from people,
but give less when they measure or weigh for buyers.
Do such people not think that they will be resurrected
for a tremendous Day—
the Day ˹all˺ people will stand before the Lord of all worlds?
But no! The wicked are certainly bound for Sijjîn ˹in the depths of Hell˺—
and what will make you realize what Sijjîn is?—
a fate ˹already˺ sealed.
Woe on that Day to the deniers—
those who deny Judgment Day!
None would deny it except every evildoing transgressor.
Whenever Our revelations are recited to them, they say, “Ancient fables!”
But no! In fact, their hearts have been stained by all ˹the evil˺ they used to commit!
Undoubtedly, they will be sealed off from their Lord on that Day.
Moreover, they will surely burn in Hell,
and then be told, “This is what you used to deny.”
But no! The virtuous are certainly bound for ’Illiyûn ˹in elevated Gardens˺—
and what will make you realize what ’Illiyûn is?—
a fate ˹already˺ sealed,
witnessed by those nearest ˹to Allah˺.
Surely the virtuous will be in bliss,
˹seated˺ on ˹canopied˺ couches, gazing around.
You will recognize on their faces the glow of delight.
They will be given a drink of sealed, pure wine,
whose last sip will smell like musk. So let whoever aspires to this strive ˹diligently˺.
And this drink’s flavour will come from Tasnîm—
a spring from which those nearest ˹to Allah˺ will drink.
Indeed, the wicked used to laugh at the believers,
wink to one another whenever they passed by,
and muse ˹over these exploits˺ upon returning to their own people.
And when they saw the faithful, they would say, “These ˹people˺ are truly astray,”
even though they were not sent as keepers over the believers.
But on that Day the believers will be laughing at the disbelievers,
as they sit on ˹canopied˺ couches, looking on.
˹The believers will be asked,˺ “Have the disbelievers ˹not˺ been paid back for what they used to do?”